How does Owen Barder define development? How does he extend Amartya Sen's definition to include the idea of complexity?

Barder argues that development is a property of the economic and social system. He doesn't consider it a product of factors around it. This allows the a nation's development to be more of a status, ever-changing. However, it could also prove to be a more inherent quality. This definition is flexible. It's somewhat dependent on how one defines property, but I digress. Barder's argument emphasizes the importance of the factors that surround wealth.

Barder compared the economic growth of South Korea and Ghana between 1960 and 2010.  Why did he make this comparison?  What did this comparison demonstrate when used as the basis to validate economic models?

This comparison originates from the disparity of wealth between the two nations. Barder questions why economic prosperity occured in one country (South Korea) and did not occur in the other until a date much closer to modern times. The only explanation for this is external stimuli or variables. What are these variables except for social norms and governmental policies? Might I add that Barder occasionally uses these terms interchangeably, or rather, uses one and neglects the other--While they are closely related, I did find it quite odd.

What was the toaster project? What did Thomas Thwaites attempt to do? Was he successful? What is the significance of this example in the context of complexity?

The toaster project was an attempt by a student to build a toaster, completely from scratch, parts and all. He attempted to replicate the simplest model he could find. However, it took him several months at a price much more than that of the original toaster. In the end, he was unable to locate rubber to insulate copper held within. Therefore, the toaster worked for a few minutes before shortly catching on fire. Thwaites stated this was a "partial success". This anecdote illustrates how complex systems are, even for something as simple as a toaster. When elevating this idea to the development of a nation, there are many more factors at play than what appears to the naked eye. We must also consider how these factors intermingle and our own observational drawbacks.

What was the Harrod Domar growth model? What are the two fundamental variables in this model? Who was Walter Rostow and what was the impact of his work on development?

The Harrod Domar growth model illustrated the correlation between labor and capital, specifically that labor generated capital. "The more labor put into something, the greater the output of that operation" I'd say that's a rather mathematically-oriented theory, but I digress. Walter Rostow expanded upon this model by creating a larger cycle with more variables: capital to income to growth to savings to investment and back around again.

What was the Robert Solow model?  How did it address the limitations of the Harrod-Domar model? Was this model successful at predicting economic growth?

Robert Solow's model incorporated neoclassical growth theory. This meant it included an additional factor by the name of technical change, although it is not clear from where exactly this factor originates. Barder states that this is "less of a model and more of a form of accounting". I would translate that into correlation without causation. Therefore, it was less capable of prediction, although it closely aligned with the data in favor to the Harrod-Domar model, and better at systematically sorting data.

What was the Ajaokuta Steel works? How did it illustrate the transition from a focus on policies to institutions?  How did Acemoglu & Robsinson's book Why Nations Fail address governance and politics?  How is their argument a response to the previously failed idea regarding engineering prosperity by providing the correct economic advice?

Ajaokuta Steel works was one of the largest investments in steel. However, it produced no steel and therefore no return on colossal investments. This is attributed to corruption and poor management, shifting focus from policies to institutions. Acemoglu and Robinson's book states that...

According to Barder, how successful have economic models been at describing and predicting growth over the past 50 years?

He states that economic growth itself has been the most successful than it ever has been in the past. However, there is no explanation for the growth. Researchers are unable to pin down what Barder describes as a "missing ingredient". It's entirely understandable considering human society is pretty much solely composed of confounding variables.

What was the significance of Schumpeter's idea of creative destruction? How does it relate to firms and institutions? What is co-evolution and why is it significant?

Creative destruction is used to explain the signficance of evolutionary change. There are some adaptations that can only be obtained by random selection; like the ideal spray nozzle, that still can't be explained. Co-evolution provokes innovation through competition, as warring countries will always create new technology. Take into context the many European nations that grew to overtake longstanding Chinese dynasties as world powers.

What is a complex adaptive system? What are some of its important features?

A complex adaptive system is evolutionary based. In simple terms, it's the act of throwing things at a wall and seeing what sticks. Then, one uses that data to make/find something stickier. This can be a rather random process, as evolution itself is.

Who was Haile Sellasie? What is the significance of Kapuscinski's book The Emperor? How did Ethiopia exemplify the suppression of emergent systemic change? Do you agree with this analysis?

Haile Sellasie was the final emporer of a dynasty in Ethiopia chronicled by Kapuscinski. The Emporer gave a detailed internal account of the authoritarian regime which existed solely from the funding from its citizens.

Why does Barder recommend resisting engineering as a policy implication?  What did he mean by iso-morphic mimicry?

What did Barder mean by "resist fatalism"? Who was Norman Borlaug and what is the green revolution?

Barder also recommended to promote innovation, embrace creative destruction and shape development.  What did he mean by these recommendations?

Who was Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen and what was his insight about economic systems and evolution?
